---
layout: narrative
title: A Letter Sent by the Maydens of London
author: Anonymous
editor1: RJ Fehrenbach (modernized text; see RQ 1988)
source: Renaissace Quarterly; also STC 16754.5 via EEBO; Lambeth Palace Library
editor2: K Nelson
---

[ A2] A Letter sent by the Maydens of London, to the vertuous Matrones & Mistresses of the same, in the de- fense of their lawfull Libertie. Answering the Mery Meeting by us Rose , Jane , Racheli, Sara , Philumias and Dorothie. Imprinted at London by Henry Binneman, for Thomas Hacket. Anno. 1567. To the right wise , sober , and discrete Matrons, and Mi- stresses of London , the Maidens of the same Citie send greeting. We were in a very evill case,14 and ryght good cause had we to dread and to dispaire of oure well doings, (moste woorthie Matrones & Mistresses) wer it not that we knew ye to be such as are not moved wyth every wynde, nor such as hang upon the blastes of every mans mouth: for else what great mischiefe and trouble those fonde and malicious Dialogues of The Mery meting of Mayiens in London, might have bred us siely15 girles, what disquietnesse of minde and body also to you myghte therby have growne (if ye wer as light of credite, as the Author is of Judgement) your wisedomes well wote, and we are not to learne. For if at his false [ A3v] surmise and suggestion, upon his bare word and letter, or upon his unjust assertion without proofe, ye shoulde have forthwith cõdemned us of such things as he layeth unto our charges (& wherunto we pleade not giltie) and thereby also should have gone about immediatly to abridge us of our lawful libertie, such an inconvenience might have arisen and growne therby, that in a verie shorte time and space, ye shoulde have gotten very fewe or no servants at al, when such as are born in the countrey shoulde choose rather to tarie at home, and remaine there to take paines for a small stipend or wages with libertie: and such as áre Citizens borne, shoulde repaire also to the coutry, or to other Cities where they might be free, than to abide as slaves and bondewomen in London, Libertas namque potior metallis,16 Then, the lesse inured and accus- tomed that every matron and mistresse were to toyle and drudge, the greater misse shoulde she have of hir mayde, the lesse [A4] paines that the mistresse were able to take, the more neede should she have of hir handmaid or servant. For as there are divers and sundry membres in the body, the least whereof the body may not well want or spare: and when any one of them is hurt or greved, the whole body suffreth smart therfore: Even so are we to you (good Mistresses) such as stände you in more steade, than some of the membres stände the body in, yea in ás much steade we alone doe stände you in, as divers membres of the body altogether do stände the body in. For one might live although he lacked one of his eyes, one of his hands, one of his legs, and might also see, or handle any thing, and walke abrode. But ye (good Matrones and Mys- tresses) withoute your maides what coulde ye doe when now ye are paste paines taking youre selves, some by reson of age waxen unweldie, some by the grossenesse of your bodies, some by lack of bringing up in paines taking, and som for sundry and [ A4v] divers other reasonable respects & causes, we are to you very eyes, hãds, feete & altogether. If ye byd us go, we run, & are as loth in any thing to offed you, as ye are to be grieved. And wherein from time to time we know that we may pleasure you, as 15. simple, helpless. 16. For indeed, freedom is preferable to money. See Morris P. Tilley, A Dictionary of the Proverbs in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Ann Arbor, Mich., 1950), 1223 : and F. P. Wilson, rev., The Oxford Dictionary of English Proverbs, 3rd edition (Oxford, 1970), p. 458.  

295 redy we are to offer it, as ye are to demaüd it, as redy to obey you as ye to commaund us. The more & the greater that your businesse are (right worthie Matrones) and the lesse able that ye your selves are to accom- plishe them, the more merite those your poore maidens, that take that toyle for you, whom it were to much against reason, to intreate evill, when they have done their dueties to use as slaves or bondewomen, being free borne, and not rather to cherishe them, and make muche of them when they take intolerable paines for a trifle. How much against al reason were it, so straightly to deale with us, and so straitely to use us, that after all the toile we take in the whole weeke, we might not enjoye a piece of [ A5] the holyday, to refresh our spirites, and to rest our wearied bones? Would ye not thinke him mad that would every day in the yeare journey his horsse? or that would course with his greyhound whilest his tayle will hang on? (as the Proverbe is)17 or overflye his Hauke. If such good heede be taken in guiding of beasts, vermins18 and foules, that they be not with too much labour spilt and marde: How much more heede oughte there to be taken, that christian people and reasonable creatures be not therwith oppressed: Quod caret alternam requiem durabile non est.19 How much more circumspect20 ought we 21 to be, that suche whose services we may not wel want, may be made off & cherished? partly for the preservation of their helth partly also that they being with honeste exercises and pastimes refreshed, may the better fal to their labor again, after that they have a little while rested? How much more ought they to be tendred, that cãby no meanes be separat? For as ye are [ A5v] they that care & provide for our meat, drinke and wages, so we are they that labor and take paines for you: so that your care for us, and our labor for you is so requisite, that they can not be separated: so needeful that they may not be severed. And where the Author doth so much invey against our overmuche libertie, in that he wryteth that hee knoweth not, and medleth of that that he hath no skill off. For, all the weeke dayes we are continually busied: and the Author fìndeth faulte but for the Holiday: the forenoone wherof we spend at Church, or about necessarie businesse at home: and 17. To hunt with hounds by sight, not by scent. I have not located any such proverb. 18. I.e., small animals generally. 19. The thing which lacks periodic rest does not endure. 20. respected. 21. Confusion in the voice exists in the next several sentences, with the reference to the maidens being made initially in the first person here, then switched to the third person in the next two sentences, to be followed by a return to the first person. 

296 so muche time have we not in the after noone, that we can farre stray ab rode, sith commoly they ring the first peale to Evesong before that we have washed up hälfe our dishes. Then must we either to Church againe, or tary at home to dresse your suppers, for fewe commonly use to fast on Sundayes or Holy dayes, in London especially: No [A6] not the very Author of the Merie meeting of maidens himselfe, who would not be very mery, if he were therto cõstrained: as like a Divine as he taketh upon him to teache and preache of that that he hath nothing to do with, of the that little set by it, and to them that do but laugh at it. And where he alleageth that we doe mispend our time in the Church in gazing and lookirig about us, and that our comming thither is not to pray: surely he himself was not very well occupied in the Church, and prayed but li tie (as it seemeth) when he stoode gazing & loking about him at us, to marke what we didde. And for oure thoughtes, sith they are so privie, that were he as cunning as the Divell, yet coulde he not knowe them, sithe God alone hathe that priveledge of all others, to know the thoughts of men, wemen, children, and of every living creature, so that he may as well lie, as say true herein, as it is more likely that he doth: therefore [ A6v] ye may credite him as ye shal see cause: we dare take it upon our consciences that if ye beleve it not at all, it shal be nothing at al prejudicial to you, nor your lacke of beleefe therein shall any thing hinder your salvation. And thus this being well tried & examined, we have not past two houres at the most upon the Holy day for our talkes, meetings, drinkings, going to playes and sporting, &c. Although his bragging and boasting title (of his Mery meeting of Maid - ens)*2 be farre worse than the worke it selfe, where in he hath as it were brought a milnepost to a pudding pricke:23 wherein also at the first sight he doeth so threaten us, as though fewe or none of us were good, yea as though the best were too bad, how holily soever in the end of his worke he excuseth himself, wherin he breaketh our heads, and afterwards giveth us plaisters. Yet when he hath sayd what he can: he can shewe no good cause why our liberties should be re [ A7] strained, as he so earnestly desired: and as on the one side the mã of likelihode is yong, and desirous of glory by publishing of somewhat in Print what so ever it were, or else 22. Nothing in the title of Hake 's work as we know it fits this description. Perhaps the author is referring to a portion of a longer title that appeared in Hake's published piece in which he contended that his work revealed the outrageous faults of the maidens. 23. A large post has been discovered to be merely a small stick. See Tilley, M964, and Wilson, p. 821. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms R.J. Fehrenbach 297 toke paines for the penny, thereto enforced by penury, so surely hath he chosen the most unfitte matter of al matters to entreat upon, if we regarded not more what became us maidens, than measured what hee hath merited & deserved. In which very choise of so many argumets, he hath no lesse declared his little wit, than he hath uttered his small skill & learning in the hãdling of it. For what one wise man will willingly meddle with a multitude, or contende with a whole company? He forgate certainly the Latine Proverbe, Ne Hercules quidem contra duos,24 when he recited six of us by name, and under those sixe names above sixe thousand of us. O madde man that he was: Doth a Phisitian winne renoune by killing or by curing his pacients? Wotteth he not that the name of a pro- [ A7v] moter25 is odious? O most worthy Orator26 what so ever he was, that for any cause could not be compelled to accuse any, but willingly for a trifle wold defend many. But surely either was this author not wel advised, or else remembred he not this Proverbe: Ne sutor ultra crepidam,27 when he toke upon him, that that nothing at al appertained unto him. For sith Divinitie is not his profession, nor that he is admitted to the office of the ministery, nor to the order of Preaching, he might well have left that office of correcting and reforming of the maners of others to the preachers, & for his owne part farre better might he have folowed that Counsell of holy S. Augustine , who saith: Medice primům teipsum cura.2* After his serious study he wold have found out some honester recreation, and medled in maters meter for his vocation, wherein also his skill and knowledge had bene greater: and in that the common law is his studie & profession, he might farre better have [A8] written of some W ritte, as Supersedeas,29 or Corpus cum causa,30 or De Idiota 24. Not even Hercules could struggle against two. See also Tilley, H436, and Wilson, p. 370. 25. promater in the text, a form that does not appear in the OED. The second syllable which serves as the catchword on sig. A7, however, is spelled mo. Although originally an officer of the crown appointed to prosecute criminal offenders, a promoter came to be known as a professional accuser or informer. 26. The modern equivalent would be plaintiff; in Roman law, an orator is an advocate, one who defends or pleads for another. 27. Let the shoemaker not go beyond his last, a proverb attributed to Apelles, the 4th-century B.C. painter. Legend has it that his art was critically commented upon by a shoemaker whose opinion about shoes Apelles had sought regarding a slipper in one of his paintings. In sum, "Let everyone mind his own business." 28. Physician first heal thyself. Biblical ( Luke 4 : 23), although without primum, and not known to have any particular association with Augustine. See Tilley, P267, and Wilson, p. 622. 29. A writ staying a proceeding. 30. Apparently more properly described as a writ of Habeas corpus cum causa, which transferred a case from one court to another. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 298 English Literary Renaissance inquirenda ,31 or of some suche like argument, a great deale more mee te for him, and agreeable for his gravide, being incident and appertinet to his science,32 more correspõdent also to his facultie, and might well have letten us poore maidens alone, and not have cõbred his capax 33 with our causes, nor have intermedled34 in our libertie. He might have spent his time farre better, than in a common consequent upon so fond an argument. Wherin, if according to his promise he proceede and make you laugh, we will borow a litle of the law, and laugh at him for company,35 we wil lay apart, and part of 36 our bashfulnesse, and deale merily with a mery man in meeter, ut impleatur Proverbium, Qui moccat moccabitur .37 But even as he was at the first procured by povertie38 to make any thing merily for money, so nowe by chance Nidiot39 it may fal forth, that moved with melãcholy40 he wil proceede [A8v] frantikely (which we are as loth shold chaunce, as he should be to procure it.) We must the of necessitie addresse our selves to Replie in defense of our liberty, and eke of our honesty, least our silece yeld us gilty. It is also right expedient41 that so it should be, ut si quam male dicendo voluptatem caeperit, earn male audiendo ammittat.42 He thought perhaps to have discredited us marvelously when he hath nowe most of al hurt himself, & hindred us very lytle or nothing. For whereas the chefest point of a Gentleman is to defende and save harm- lesse43 to his uttermost, the poore and silly women when they are wronged and oppressed: and many have thereby onely woon them selves an immortali fame, so hath this mad mery man for his Mery meting of 31 . A writ, the purpose of which was to inquire whether a person be an idiot. 32. occupation. 33. head. 34. A legal term suggesting interfering without right. The whole preceding sentence is replete with legal language. 35. good fellowship. 36. lay .. . part of: put aside. 37. As provided by the proverb, he who mocks shall be mocked. See Tilley, Ml 031, and Wilson, p. 537. 38. procured by povertie: acted for money, but with the salacious overtones carried by the term "procuring." 39. idiot. 40. violent anger. 41. proper, fit. 42. The Latin makes no sense, but the idea is probably "he who is pleased by saying what he should not, will be displeased by hearing what he would not," a variation on a common proverbial phrase that has origins in Terence and Erasmus. See Tilley, SI 15 and Wilson, p. 762. 43. protect. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms R.J. Fehrenbach 299 maydens madly mads44 in mery meter, merited only to be mockt and laughed to skorne for his labor, and well declared how base his byrthe and bringing up are, and how far re unlike a Gentleman he is to seeke to hurt them [Bl] whom he ought to helpe: to make so great boast to bring to small roast, to barke so loude and to byte nothing.45 For what be the causes wherefore he wold have us restrained of our liberties? "Forsoth bycause of privie contracts, he wold not have us resort to Playes:46 he finde th fault with our great expences in banqueting, and accuse th us with pilfering and pycking of meate and candéis from you for mother B,47 by whome (as he saith) we are boldned and encoraged to be stoute and stubborne to you, being alwayes placed by them in service, if at any time we be destitute." This is the whole summe (good Matrons and mistresses) of all his three Dialogues, saving that he accuseth Rachel to occupie for hir selfe,48 which sith she is better able to denie than he to justifie, there nedeth no further ado in that mater. But for the rest, as the privie contractes especially, surely it is a thing that we do not very well allow,49 nor yet 44. The present tense of mads, a verb meaning 44 rages," is not in keeping with the rest of the sentence. Such inconsistency of tenses, however, is not uncommonly found in pamphlets that affect the oral delivery. See Susan Clark, The Elizabethan Pamphleteer: Popular Moralistic Pamphlets, 1580-1640 ( East Brunswick, N.J., 1983), pp. 249-50. Still, the compositer may have mistaken the secretary terminal e for an s in the manuscript, printing mads instead of an authorial made. 45. These two proverbs convey essentially the same meaning: great expectations aroused, but little delivered. See Tilley, B488, and Wilson, p. 333 on the first, and Tilley, B85 and B86, and Wilson, pp. 30-31, on the second. 46. Forsoth . . . Playes. The connection between "privy contracts" and attendance at plays is not made in the defense that follows; see sig. B2v. The author probably did not intend to connect the two here either; he not uncommonly ties two independent clauses with a comma. In any case, the accusations he defends against are four, not three. 47. A figure criticized at length by Hake in Newes out of Powles Churchyarde (1567, 1579), where he excoriates this old woman, a kind of Elizabethan female Fagin, who, he says, entices "siely girles," and "simple maydes" (Newes, sig. F8v). Hake's attack on Mother B. in Newes allows us to understand something about the references to this woman in A Letter. To Hake she is a special danger to "The countrey maides that come from far, / as straungers to the towns: / Whome still the Trottes doe tittle so, / that straight all shame layde down" (Newes, sig. F8v). All too frequently, according to Newes, these maidens travelling to the city to work as servants are enticed by Mother B. to steal from their masters and mistresses arid then to leave their employment only to be placed elsewhere - by implication with Mother B.'s connivance - to continue their "whoredome, theft, and filching" (sig. Gl). Whatever the letter "B" stood for (perhaps Broker, probably Bawd), Mother B. is a curious figure: to Hake a sinister force; to the author of A Letter an example of pitiable poverty. Whichever she was, one assumes that the old woman and the argument about her meant more to the writers' contemporaries than they do to us, however intriguing we find the character four centuries later. 48. to occupie . . . selfe : suggestive of prostitution. 49. Here and in the following sentence meaning praise rather than permit. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 300 English Literary Renaissance alto- [B1 v] gether discommende. Allow it we may not, Condemne it we can not. For as our parentes advise is alwayes to be asked in the choyce of our husbands, so is it not alwaies to be followed, namely when we can not frame our selves to love the partie that our parentes have provided for us. Is it not a ruled case in the law,50 that the Warde for sundry lawful causes may lawfully refuse to marie, when mariage is by his Garden51 tendred to him? As if his Garden wil marie him to one that is bond, to one that is maymed or disfigured, & such like: how much more may we refuse such olde doting fooles as somtimes ar procured by our paretes to be suters to us, & have a thousand worse impedimentes, and nothyng but their goods and money to mary them, no not so much as any one good propertie or qualitie. Lette us say nothing of their extreme covetousnesse, (Cum enim omnia vitia in sene senescunt, Avaritia solummodo invenescit, )52 and divers other their crooked and crabbed condicions. [B2] What great gaine shall a yong mayden have by matching with any of them, when œmonly they leave at their death behinde them many yong children, and litle or nothing to kepe them with? For as they may give all to their wives, if they list, so notwithstanding the most honest laufull and laudable cus- tome of this most famous Citie to the contrary, they may in their lyfe time by unconscionable conveyance convey all from them,53 if they lyst, as seldom litle they leave them, in respect of that they deserve, unlesse it be upon condition not to mary againe, whilest they live. Thus have their poore wives a very evill recompense for their painfull services and diligence, and are put to a very hard choise, eyther to ende theyr lives with beggery, or being yong and bound from mariage and driven (the more is the pytie) to live (as some chanceth) incontinently. And sith love should be the principali cause in mariage, why shold we be blamed, for chosing wher we most love and fansie? Concordia respar- [B2v] vae crescunt, 50. Arrived at by judicial action, not by statute. The specific reference is to the law of disparagement, which had for centuries provided that guardians could not marry their wards to any who would, for a variety of reasons, from defects of body or mind to lower station of birth, discredit the ward. For full discussion of this legal tradition, see Joel Hurstfield, The Queen's Wards: Wardship and Marriage Under Elizabeth I (Cambridge, Mass., 1958), pp. 138ff. 51. guardian. 52. Although all vices decline with age, avarice alone increases. See Tilley, S479 and M568, and Wilson, p. 737. 53. In England, local custom or a practice with a long tradition often took legal precedence in a locale over more widely applied statutory law. According to London custom, a wife was guaranteed at least one third of her husband's real and personal property upon his death. He could, however, arrange through legal means, while he still lived, to convey that property to others to circumvent this local London customary law of inheritance. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms R. J . Fehrenbach 301 discordia maxima dilabuntur, With concord and good agreement small things encrease and wax great, with discord the greatest things of all decay and come to naught.54 Blame us not if we wold avoid so great inconveniences in the choyse of them whom we must serve all our lyfe tyme, when no wise wench willingly wold be hyred of any for a yeare, without a profe of time of liking. The author of the Dialogue seemeth to be unmaried, else surely shold he finde by experience, that all things55 are almost to few to make good agreement to last and continue in maried couples. As we are not so wynching wood56 to choose boyes or lads that lacke experience and the trade to live, so loth we to be coupled in mariage with such as are lothsom to looke upon, Medium tenuere beati.57 Now in that he findeth fault for our going to plaies and enterludes, your wisdomes know well, that in a godly play or enterlude (if it be well made and under- [B3] standed) may be much learning had: for so lively are in them set forth the vices and vertues before our eyes, in gestures and speach, that we can bothe take learning and pleasure in them. But as for you (right worthy and vertuous Matrons) many resort to sermons, also not so much for your pleasure (as we take it) as ye do for your good instruction and edifiying. But herein the author playeth the crafty marchant, by casting that in our teeth, for which he rather mysliketh58 you that are our mistresses, as who wold say he chastened the Lyon by the whelpe.59 Our great costes and charges in good chere and banketting objected by him against us, sith he hath named no great deynties, nor yet any great shot or reckning,60 he hath but sayd a thing that he hath not proved, and so have we the lesse to say therein: and so much the rather sith he him selfe against his will, or more than he remembreth, hath sayd metely well for us in that behalf. For when Rose would have sent for wyn e Jane [B3v] wold not suffer hir, and so had they but bare beere alone that we heard of. Now at that feast or rather a bare beere banket, there were but they 54. The first part of the Latin passage, which is translated in the text, is the motto of the Merchant Tailors. See Tilley, Uli and Wilson, P. 854. 55. material goods. 56. insane. 57. Happy people keep to the middle course. 58. disapproves of. 59. chastened. . . whelp: a proverbial phrase by which the author charges Hake with criticizing the matrons' actions indirectly by attacking the similar actions of their maidservants. See Tilley D443 and Wilson, p. 37. 60. shot . . . reckning: both are terms for a bill presented at a tavern. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 302 English Literary Renaissance two alone, the day was hälfe spent and more, for it was well in the after noone. And they are no such quaffers but that a quart would serve them well when they had well dronken before at their dynner. Also a quart of the best beere may be boughte for a peny, so that they two that daye spent eche of them a halfepeny. Summa totalis of all that was spent that daie betwene them two at the costely banket, was a peny. Thus have you a quicke reckening and a slow payment, a marvellous expence and a mischevous charge. For our pilfring and picking from you (our Mistresses) for mother B. &c. If that matter were proved, it could not be well with us, although that in other things he listed to dally, yet here he jested but homely,61 in charging us with that felony: but his witnesses herein are as far [B4] to seeke as were his wittes, being dulled and cloyed (as he wrote) with careful and serious studie: ye your selves are farre better hable to answere for us, and to excuse us, than he is hable to accuse us. For why? Ye knowe that we admit no poore women (whome in dispight he nameth B.)62 to help us without your leave and licence, and not without good cause do ye licence them sometimes to helpe us: for such do ye hire at your pleasures for a trifle and for a small time, when ye nede not to be at charges with them all the yere, your provisions also being dayly made in the shambles63 and markets, we cannot lightly64 be false in robbing of your poudering tubbes;65 and ye are not so slender66 huswives, but ye would easily espie it, and quickely misse it: & a candles ende is not so costly, that giving it to a poore woman to light hir home in a dark night for67 breaking hir face or shinnes, would undoe you, or greatly hinder you. But he is loth that poverty should have any relief at your handes: what thinke ye [B4v] would he have you to give at your dores in almes to beggers that do nothing for it, when he is thus offended that poore women should have their hire68 for their paynes, a few scraps of broken 61 . although . . . homely: this final charge the author appears to find more serious, suggesting that Hake was with his other accusations not really touching on matters of major concern to the matrons. With the charge that the servant girls steal from their mistresses, and are in the pay and influence of a quasi-underworld figure, Hake is causing real trouble or is showing a poor sense of humor. 62. probably Bawd, perhaps Broker. See note 69. 63. meat market. 64. easily. 65. tubs in which meat was powdered, or salted, that is, pickled. 66. lax. 67. to keep from. 68. wages. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms R.J. Fehrenbach 303 breade meete for their toyle and travaile? For their broking69 and helping of servantes to services is but a tale of a tubbe,70 such poore peoples credit is not hälfe so great, that they can shew any so great a pleasure,71 yet surely were it not amisse, if any such brokers were, then servants sodenly without warning put out of service, should not by any necessitie be constrayned to lyve unhonestly. As what would not one do pinched with penury? hunger breketh stone walles (as the proverb is)72 and why should we be afrayd in honest wise73 to complayne to our Maisters and Mis- tresses when we finde any thing a misse, & desire their good leave to depart, when they wil not redresse it? What a long tale told he of Dorothy , when she would serve no longer? how she was brought before the Aldermans Depu- [B5] tie,74 what gained hir master thereby? Although at the first the officer spake some what stoutly, yet spake he at last full resonably, and Dorothy might depart laufully, there was no cause to the contrary. For why? she was by the yere hired, hir time was expired, she ought75 no longer service, she was overcharged with worke, she had complained and found no amendment, she sought for more easement,76 she liked not that intertainment.77 Sed ut caedas canem, facile reperitur baculus .78 The man would fayne have picked a quarrel, but he fared like wil Sommer:79 for some by likelihode had angred him, and bicause he could not with his staffe reach them, he stroake them that stode next unto him: but our trust is that your wisdoms wil way but lightly that that he hath writen ful fondly: and for al his babling ( wherin he semeth to delight to heare him selfe to talke) we hope that you wil be as good Mistresses unto us as heretofore ye have been. Accept our services as ye finde us. First trie us, then [B5v] trust us: Faire words and 69. This and the reference to brokers later in the same sentence carry pejorative associations ranging from the dealings of a dishonest go-between, suggestive of a bawd, to those of a dishonest legal agent. 70. a tall-tale, a lie. See Tilley, T45, and Wilson, p. 803. 71. such poore . . . pleasure: poor people do not have the kind of influence required to place servants in employment. 72. See Tilley, H811, and Wilson, p. 392. 73. in .. . wise: candidly. 74. The law provided that disputes between London servants and masters over terms of service were to be adjudicated by city officials. 75. owed. 76. redress of grievances. 77. employment or treatment. 78. If one wants to beat a dog, he will easily fìnd a stick. See Tilley, T138, and Wilson, p. 769. 79. Will Summers was the jester of Henry VIII, and jesters were known to use their staffs or bladders to strike in slapstick style those nearest them. This content downloaded from 129.2.181.163 on Wed, 31 May 2017 18:07:25 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 304 English Literary Renaissance getle entreating of us shal do more a gret deale with us, than a thousand of threattes & stripes,80 we would not wish you to kepe that servat that serveth you not in a maner as much for your love as for your money. Oderint dum metuant ,81 was the saying of a moste cruel tyrant, of all men to be rejected, of no man to be allowed nor accepted: whe al is done, frendeship is the surest garde. Let us have, we besech you, our honest accustomed libertie, sith ye know no just cause to the contrary, intreate us as we shall deserve, we will deserve to be well entreated. So much are we busied this terme82 by reason of the greate resort83 that cõmeth to your housen (good Mistresses) of your kinsfolkes frendes and guestes, that for this time we are constrayned to make an end. Wherfore we wil commit you all to the holy Tuytion84 of the most blessed Trini tie, whom we most humbly besech to send unto you our Mistresses long life, great encrease of worship, & all felicity: & unto us your pore had maides [B6] and servantes good health, hartes ease, and the grace to do our duties to you. Scribled in haste this xiii, of November. 1567. Your handmaydens and ser- vants Rose , Jane, Racheli ' Sara , Philumias & Dorothy. FINIS. Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman for Thomas Hacket. Anno. 1567. 80. beatings, lashes. 81. "Let them hate provided they fear me," is said to have been spoken by the Emperor Tiberius. 82. The calendar was divided according to the quarterly sessions of the court, the specific term referred to here being the Michaelmas Term. 83. throng. 84. protection.
